src/docs/antora/modules/ROOT/pages/runtime.adoc, before:

[[runtime]]
= Spring Modulith Runtime Support

The functionality described in previous chapters have all used the application module arrangement in either testing scenarios for verification and documentation purposes or were general support functionality that help to loosely couple modules but did not work with the application module structure directly.
In this section we are going to describe Spring Modulith's support for module initialization at application runtime.

NOTE: If you are applying customizations to the application module detection described xref:fundamentals.adoc#customizing-modules[here], you need to move those into your production sources, unless already present there, to make sure that those are considered by the features described here.

[[setup]]
== Setting up Runtime Support for Application Modules

To enable the runtime support for Spring Modulith, make sure you include the `spring-modulith-runtime` JAR in your project.
[tabs]
======
Maven::
+
[source, xml, role="primary"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.springframework.modulith</groupId>
  <artifactId>spring-modulith-runtime</artifactId>
  <scope>runtime</scope>
</dependency>
----

Gradle::
+
[source, xml, role="secondary"]
----
dependencies {
  runtimeOnly 'org.springframework.modulith:spring-modulith-runtime'
}
----
======

Adding this JAR will cause Spring Boot auto-configuration to run that registers the following components in your application:

* An `ApplicationModulesRuntime` that allows to access the `ApplicationModules`.
* A `SpringBootApplicationRuntime` to back the former bean to detect the main application class.
* A `RuntimeApplicationModuleVerifier` to verify the application module arrangement on startup and abort it if violations are detected, only if `spring.modulith.runtime.verification-enabled` is configured to `true`.
* An event listener for https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle/#features.spring-application.application-events-and-listeners[`ApplicationStartedEvent`]s that will invoke xref:runtime.adoc#application-module-initializer[`ApplicationModuleInitializer`] beans defined in the application context.

[[application-module-initializer]]
== Application Module Initializers

When working with application modules, it is pretty common to need to execute some code specific to an individual module on application startup.
This means that the execution order of that code needs to follow the dependency structure of the application modules.
If a module B depends on module A, the initialization code of A has to run before the one for B, even if the initializers do not directly depend on another.

[plantuml, format='svg']
....
hide empty members

package org.springframework.modulith {
interface ApplicationModuleInitializer
}

package com.acme.moduleA {
  class InitializerA implements ApplicationModuleInitializer

  class ComponentA
}

package com.acme.moduleB {

  class ComponentB

  class InitializerB implements ApplicationModuleInitializer
}

ComponentB --> ComponentA

....

While developers could of course define the execution order via Spring's standard `@Order` annotation or `Ordered` interface, Spring Modulith provides an `ApplicationModuleInitializer` interface for beans to be run on application startup.
The execution order of those beans will automatically follow the application module dependency structure.

[tabs]
======
Java::
+
[source, java, role="primary"]
----
@Component
class MyInitializer implements ApplicationModuleInitializer {

  @Override
  public void initialize() {
    // Initialization code goes here
  }
}
----
Kotlin::
+
[source, kotlin, role="secondary"]
----
@Component
class MyInitializer : ApplicationModuleInitializer {

  
  override fun initialize() {
    // Initialization code goes here
  }
}
----
======
Note that the `ApplicationModuleInitializer` beans will only be invoked if the `spring-modulith-runtime` JAR is on the classpath (see xref:runtime.adoc#setup[Setting up Runtime Support for Application Modules]) as that pulls in the dependencies that are needed to topologically sort the initializers according to the application module structure.

[[module-aware-flyway-migrations]]
== Application-Module Aware Flyway Migrations

As of Spring Modulith 2.0, we support the execution of module-specific https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/how-to/data-initialization.html#howto.data-initialization.migration-tool.flyway[Flyway migrations].
Application modules are encouraged to define migrations for their own persistent data only, which means that these migrations have to be executed in the order of the module dependency tree.

Assume a default Flyway setup with migrations located in `classpath:db/migration`, two application modules `first` and `second` (with `second` depending on `first`), and an activated `spring.modulith.runtime.flyway-enabled` xref:appendix.adoc#configuration-properties[configuration property].
With that in place we will augment the configured migration to run the default one first, followed by one for `classpath:db/migration/first` and one for `classpath:db/migration/second`.

By selecting which folder to place the migration files in, you can differentiate migrations always to be run from ones that will only get executed for the corresponding module. The application module test integration will only execute the default migration and the ones for modules included in the test run.

We will not augment migration runs including wildcard expressions in the migration location definition.

Commit message:

GH-1440 - Revamp application-module-specific Flyway migration to fully isolate modules.
We now set up completely independent migrations per module.

src/docs/antora/modules/ROOT/pages/runtime.adoc, after:

[[runtime]]
= Spring Modulith Runtime Support

The functionality described in previous chapters have all used the application module arrangement in either testing scenarios for verification and documentation purposes or were general support functionality that help to loosely couple modules but did not work with the application module structure directly.
In this section we are going to describe Spring Modulith's support for module initialization at application runtime.

NOTE: If you are applying customizations to the application module detection described xref:fundamentals.adoc#customizing-modules[here], you need to move those into your production sources, unless already present there, to make sure that those are considered by the features described here.

[[setup]]
== Setting up Runtime Support for Application Modules

To enable the runtime support for Spring Modulith, make sure you include the `spring-modulith-runtime` JAR in your project.
[tabs]
======
Maven::
+
[source, xml, role="primary"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.springframework.modulith</groupId>
  <artifactId>spring-modulith-runtime</artifactId>
  <scope>runtime</scope>
</dependency>
----

Gradle::
+
[source, xml, role="secondary"]
----
dependencies {
  runtimeOnly 'org.springframework.modulith:spring-modulith-runtime'
}
----
======

Adding this JAR will cause Spring Boot auto-configuration to run that registers the following components in your application:

* An `ApplicationModulesRuntime` that allows to access the `ApplicationModules`.
* A `SpringBootApplicationRuntime` to back the former bean to detect the main application class.
* A `RuntimeApplicationModuleVerifier` to verify the application module arrangement on startup and abort it if violations are detected, only if `spring.modulith.runtime.verification-enabled` is configured to `true`.
* An event listener for https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle/#features.spring-application.application-events-and-listeners[`ApplicationStartedEvent`]s that will invoke xref:runtime.adoc#application-module-initializer[`ApplicationModuleInitializer`] beans defined in the application context.

[[application-module-initializer]]
== Application Module Initializers

When working with application modules, it is pretty common to need to execute some code specific to an individual module on application startup.
This means that the execution order of that code needs to follow the dependency structure of the application modules.
If a module B depends on module A, the initialization code of A has to run before the one for B, even if the initializers do not directly depend on another.

[plantuml, format='svg']
....
hide empty members

package org.springframework.modulith {
interface ApplicationModuleInitializer
}

package com.acme.moduleA {
  class InitializerA implements ApplicationModuleInitializer

  class ComponentA
}

package com.acme.moduleB {

  class ComponentB

  class InitializerB implements ApplicationModuleInitializer
}

ComponentB --> ComponentA

....

While developers could of course define the execution order via Spring's standard `@Order` annotation or `Ordered` interface, Spring Modulith provides an `ApplicationModuleInitializer` interface for beans to be run on application startup.
The execution order of those beans will automatically follow the application module dependency structure.

[tabs]
======
Java::
+
[source, java, role="primary"]
----
@Component
class MyInitializer implements ApplicationModuleInitializer {

  @Override
  public void initialize() {
    // Initialization code goes here
  }
}
----
Kotlin::
+
[source, kotlin, role="secondary"]
----
@Component
class MyInitializer : ApplicationModuleInitializer {

  
  override fun initialize() {
    // Initialization code goes here
  }
}
----
======
Note that the `ApplicationModuleInitializer` beans will only be invoked if the `spring-modulith-runtime` JAR is on the classpath (see xref:runtime.adoc#setup[Setting up Runtime Support for Application Modules]) as that pulls in the dependencies that are needed to topologically sort the initializers according to the application module structure.

[[module-aware-flyway-migrations]]
== Application-Module Aware Flyway Migrations

As of Spring Modulith 2.0, we support the execution of module-specific https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/how-to/data-initialization.html#howto.data-initialization.migration-tool.flyway[Flyway migrations].
Application modules are encouraged to define migrations for their own persistent data only, which means that these migrations have to be executed in the order of the module dependency tree.

Assume a default Flyway setup with migrations located in `classpath:db/migration`, two application modules `first` and `second` (with `second` depending on `first`), and an activated `spring.modulith.runtime.flyway-enabled` xref:appendix.adoc#configuration-properties[configuration property].

With that in place we will customize the Flyway setup as follows:

- The root migration folder will be changed to `db/migration/__root`. For that, the default version tracking table will be used.
- Additional migrations for `db/migration/${moduleIdentifier}` will be registered with a tracking table of `flyway_schema_history_${moduleIdentifier}`.
These migrations are also set up to a baseline version of 0 and set up to baseline on migrate.
- Migration locations ending in a wildcard will not be customized.

Note, that he version numbers used in migration scripts are now effectively scoped to the application module and should not use global ordering.

By selecting which folder to place the migration files in, you can differentiate migrations always to be run from ones that will only get executed for the corresponding module. The application module test integration will only execute the default migration and the ones for modules included in the test run.
