src/docs/asciidoc/90-appendix.adoc, before:

[[appendix]]
= Appendix
:jdbc-schema-base: ../../../spring-modulith-events/spring-modulith-events-jdbc/src/main/resources

[appendix]
[[appendix.migrating-from-moduliths]]
== Migrating from Moduliths


* `o.m.model.Modules` has been renamed to `o.s.m.model.ApplicationModules`
* `o.m.model.ModuleDetectionStrategy` has been renamed to `o.s.m.model.ApplicationModuleDetectionStrategy`

* `@o.m.test.ModuleTest` has been renamed to `@o.s.m.test.ApplicationModuleTest`

* `o.m.docs.Documenter.Options` has been renamed to `o.s.m.docs.Documenter.DiagramOptions`
* The diagram style of component diagrams now defaults to `DiagramStyle.C4` (override by calling `DiagramOptions.withStyle(DiagramStyle.UML)`)
* The module canvas hides non exposed types by default.
To include application-module-internal types in the canvas, configure `CanvasOptions` to `….revealInternals()`.
* The output folder for component diagrams and application module canvases has moved from `moduliths-docs` to `spring-modulith-docs` located in your build's target folder (such as `target` for Maven).

[appendix]
[[appendix.artifacts]]
== Spring Modulith modules

.Spring Modulith starter POMs
[cols="3,1,5", options="header, unbreakable"]
|===
|Starter|Typical scope|Description
|`spring-modulith-starter-jdbc`|`compile`|Includes `spring-modulith-api`, `spring-modulith-moments` as well as `spring-modulith-events-jdbc`.
|`spring-modulith-starter-jpa`|`compile`|Includes `spring-modulith-api`, `spring-modulith-moments` as well as `spring-modulith-events-jpa`.
|`spring-modulith-starter-mongodb`|`compile`|Includes `spring-modulith-api`, `spring-modulith-moments` as well as `spring-modulith-events-mongodb`.
|`spring-modulith-starter-test`|`compile`|Includes `spring-modulith-docs` and `spring-modulith-test`.
|===

.Individual Spring Modulith JARs
[cols="3,1,5", options="header, unbreakable"]
|===
|Module|Typical scope|Description
|`spring-modulith-api`|`compile`|The abstractions to be used in your production code to customize Spring Modulith's default behavior.
|`spring-modulith-core`|`runtime`|The core application module model and API.
|`spring-modulith-docs`|`test`|The `Documenter` API to create Asciidoctor and PlantUML documentation from the module model.
|`spring-modulith-events-core`|`runtime`|The core implementation of the event publication registry as well as the integration abstractions `EventPublicationRegistry` and `EventPublicationSerializer`.
|`spring-modulith-events-jackson`|`runtime`|A Jackson-based implementation of the `EventPublicationSerializer`.
|`spring-modulith-events-jdbc`|`runtime`|A JDBC-based implementation of the `EventPublicationRegistry`.
|`spring-modulith-events-jpa`|`runtime`|A JPA-based implementation of the `EventPublicationRegistry`.
|`spring-modulith-events-mongodb`|`runtime`|A MongoDB-based implementation of the `EventPublicationRegistry`.
|`spring-modulith-moments`|`compile`|The Passage of Time events implementation described <<moments, here>>.
|`spring-modulith-observability`|`runtime`|Observability infrastructure described <<observability, here>>.
|===

[appendix]
[[appendix.schemas]]
== Event publication registry schemas

[[appendix.schemas.h2]]
=== H2

[source, sql]
----
include::{jdbc-schema-base}/schema-h2.sql[]
----

[[appendix.schemas.hsqldb]]
=== HSQLDB

[source, sql]
----
include::{jdbc-schema-base}/schema-hsqldb.sql[]
----

[[appendix.schemas.mysql]]
=== MySQL

[source, sql]
----
include::{jdbc-schema-base}/schema-mysql.sql[]
----

[[appendix.schemas.postgresql]]
=== PostgreSQL

[source, sql]
----
include::{jdbc-schema-base}/schema-postgresql.sql[]
----

Commit message:

GH-121 - Added new modules to reference documentation.

src/docs/asciidoc/90-appendix.adoc, after:

[[appendix]]
= Appendix
:jdbc-schema-base: ../../../spring-modulith-events/spring-modulith-events-jdbc/src/main/resources

[appendix]
[[appendix.migrating-from-moduliths]]
== Migrating from Moduliths


* `o.m.model.Modules` has been renamed to `o.s.m.model.ApplicationModules`
* `o.m.model.ModuleDetectionStrategy` has been renamed to `o.s.m.model.ApplicationModuleDetectionStrategy`

* `@o.m.test.ModuleTest` has been renamed to `@o.s.m.test.ApplicationModuleTest`

* `o.m.docs.Documenter.Options` has been renamed to `o.s.m.docs.Documenter.DiagramOptions`
* The diagram style of component diagrams now defaults to `DiagramStyle.C4` (override by calling `DiagramOptions.withStyle(DiagramStyle.UML)`)
* The module canvas hides non exposed types by default.
To include application-module-internal types in the canvas, configure `CanvasOptions` to `….revealInternals()`.
* The output folder for component diagrams and application module canvases has moved from `moduliths-docs` to `spring-modulith-docs` located in your build's target folder (such as `target` for Maven).

[appendix]
[[appendix.artifacts]]
== Spring Modulith modules

.Spring Modulith starter POMs
[cols="3,1,5", options="header, unbreakable"]
|===
|Starter|Typical scope|Description
|`spring-modulith-starter-jdbc`|`compile`|Includes `spring-modulith-api`, `spring-modulith-moments` as well as `spring-modulith-events-jdbc`.
|`spring-modulith-starter-jpa`|`compile`|Includes `spring-modulith-api`, `spring-modulith-moments` as well as `spring-modulith-events-jpa`.
|`spring-modulith-starter-mongodb`|`compile`|Includes `spring-modulith-api`, `spring-modulith-moments` as well as `spring-modulith-events-mongodb`.
|`spring-modulith-starter-test`|`compile`|Includes `spring-modulith-docs` and `spring-modulith-test`.
|===

.Individual Spring Modulith JARs
[cols="3,1,5", options="header, unbreakable"]
|===
|Module|Typical scope|Description
|`spring-modulith-actuator`|`runtime`|A Spring Boot actuator to expose the application module structure via an actuator.
|`spring-modulith-api`|`compile`|The abstractions to be used in your production code to customize Spring Modulith's default behavior.
|`spring-modulith-core`|`runtime`|The core application module model and API.
|`spring-modulith-docs`|`test`|The `Documenter` API to create Asciidoctor and PlantUML documentation from the module model.
|`spring-modulith-events-core`|`runtime`|The core implementation of the event publication registry as well as the integration abstractions `EventPublicationRegistry` and `EventPublicationSerializer`.
|`spring-modulith-events-jackson`|`runtime`|A Jackson-based implementation of the `EventPublicationSerializer`.
|`spring-modulith-events-jdbc`|`runtime`|A JDBC-based implementation of the `EventPublicationRegistry`.
|`spring-modulith-events-jpa`|`runtime`|A JPA-based implementation of the `EventPublicationRegistry`.
|`spring-modulith-events-mongodb`|`runtime`|A MongoDB-based implementation of the `EventPublicationRegistry`.
|`spring-modulith-moments`|`compile`|The Passage of Time events implementation described <<moments, here>>.
|`spring-modulith-runtime`|`runtime`|Support to bootstrap an `ApplicationModules` instance at runtime. Usually not directly depended on but transitively used by `spring-modulith-actuator` and `spring-modulith-observability`.
|`spring-modulith-observability`|`runtime`|Observability infrastructure described <<observability, here>>.
|===

[appendix]
[[appendix.schemas]]
== Event publication registry schemas

[[appendix.schemas.h2]]
=== H2

[source, sql]
----
include::{jdbc-schema-base}/schema-h2.sql[]
----

[[appendix.schemas.hsqldb]]
=== HSQLDB

[source, sql]
----
include::{jdbc-schema-base}/schema-hsqldb.sql[]
----

[[appendix.schemas.mysql]]
=== MySQL

[source, sql]
----
include::{jdbc-schema-base}/schema-mysql.sql[]
----

[[appendix.schemas.postgresql]]
=== PostgreSQL

[source, sql]
----
include::{jdbc-schema-base}/schema-postgresql.sql[]
----
